h2. Spree 1.0.0 Release Notes

endprologue.

h3. Miscellaneous improvements

h4. Seed data in extensions

Calling +rake db:seed+ or +rake db:bootstrap+ will run Spree's +db/seeds.rb+ and now it also runs the
same named file in your extensions.

To specify seed data in your extension directory, create a
+db/seeds.rb+ file and add any code in here you want. Often the code you write
in +db/seeds.rb+ will load YAML fixtures into the database, see the +db/seeds.rb+
file in Spree core for an example of this.

h4. Sample product images in extensions

For some time now you've been able to write sample data fixtures in extensions
that will get run when you load sample data with the +rake db:bootstrap+ task.

Now you can also add sample product image files in your extensions in the 
extensions own +lib/tasks/sample/products+ directory.  These images will be 
copied to the +public/assets/products+ directory when the sample data is loaded.

h4. Product Groups

Product groups are new feature that lets you create dynamic groupings of products, based on specified criteria, like:
* Taxonomy
* Price
* Name and/or description
* Full text search (if available)
* Product attributes (option types and properties)
* Popularity (total number of variants ever added to cart)

you can read more about them in guide: <%= guide('Product Groups', 'product_groups.html') %>

h4. Ad Hoc search urls

You can select products to be displayed with simply typing in an url!
This way on your home page you can have a set of bookmarkable and SEO friendly
urls to most important products from your store.

Example:

* http://demo.spreecommerce.com/s/keywords/stein,mug
* http://demo.spreecommerce.com/s/price_between/10,20/in_name/Rails

You can also use this search functionality within taxon:

* http://demo.spreecommerce.com/t/shirts/clothing/categories/t-shirts/s/in_name/Baseball

allowed options and full documentation can be found in <%= guide('Product Scopes', 'product_scopes.html') %>